---
date: 2015-05-12
title: "Bayesian Adaptive Designs"
subtitle: "Are they truly no longer the domain for statisticians only?"
comments: true
tags: ["study design", "research", "methodology"]
slug: "bayesian-adaptive-designs"
---

Research design methodology—especially clinical and other research
involving human participants—that can make better use of already limited
resources should definitely be considered. Adaptive designs,
outcome-adaptive randomisation, dynamic treatment strategies and
sequential multiple assignment randomisation trials are some of the
designs that are gaining momentum. But are Bayesian Adaptive Designs
(BADs) really

> no longer 'a dream for statisticians only'?

as suggested by Gajewski et al. (2015)?

I'm not really sure this is true, and perhaps their opening line should
be seen more as *clickbait*, as the authors really do not provide any
solid evidence for this assertion. At a superficial level, the first
three named authors all have statistics PhDs, and the article is
published in [Statistics in
Medicine](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1002/(ISSN)1097-0258),
a high-ranking journal focusing on (funnily enough) statistics in
medicine!

So who then, are BADs for? Gajewski et al. (2015) don't really say. The
state that they are being published more in non-statistical journals,
which

> indicates that the time is right for the use of BAD

but in all reality, I think you're going to need a statistician to help
you plan one. In their introduction, Gajewski et al. (2015) discuss that
they will

> show how simulation quickly becomes the tool of choice because of its
> flexibility

but without expertise in conducting simulation studies, such a research
design is already unattainable, and still remains possible for only
those research groups who have access to statistical expertise.

Gajewski et al. (2015) also point to a methodology statement by PCORI
(Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute) Methodology Commitee
(2013), which is seen to encourage the use of BADs in patient centred
outcomes research. This is great, as I think this sort of design is
definitely useful, but it still doesn't help bring the methodology out
to the general researcher. If you are interested in BADs, then the PCORI
methodology report is a good read, as I think it does touch on all the
significant inclusions you'll need in your statistical analysis plan for
your study.

So, "no longer a dream for statisticians only"? Not quite. A good idea?
Yes definitely!

#### References

<div style="font-size:75%">


Gajewski, Byron J., Scott M. Berry, Melanie Quintana, Mamatha Pasnoor,
Mazen Dimachkie, Laura Herbelin, and Richard Barohn. 2015. “Building
Efficient Comparative Effectiveness Trials Through Adaptive Designs,
Utility Functions, and Accrual Rate Optimization: finding the Sweet
Spot.” *Statistics in Medicine* 34 (7) (March): 1134–1149.
doi:[10.1002/sim.6403](http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.6403).
<http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/sim.6403>.

PCORI (Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute) Methodology
Commitee. 2013. “The PCORI Methodology Report.”
<http://www.pcori.org/research-we-support/research-methodology-standards/>.
