---
date: 2016-10-24
title: "Reading notes"
description: "Notes from research readings"
tags: ["surveillance", "aggregation"]
categories: notes
comments: true
---

Readings
--------

### An improved cumulative sum-based procedure for prospective disease surveillance for count data in multiple regions

Dassanayake, S., & French, J. P. (2016). An improved cumulative
sum-based procedure for prospective disease surveillance for count data
in multiple regions. Statistics in Medicine.
<https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.6887>

-   Cumulative counts are created from neighbouring areas for
    monitoring/detecting diseases outbreaks
-   prospective surveillance
    -   decisions made at regular intervals about incidence, c.f.
        analysing the whole dataset retrospectively
    -   so possible multiple comparisons issues?
-   For CUSUM-based methods, the in-control distribution can be
    estimated via bootstrap
    -   p-values for exceeding CUSUM threshold can then be calculated
    -   why p-values?
    -   is this another case for going Bayesian to get posterior
        probabilities
-   Provides discussion on *standard* Poisson CUSUM
    -   parameters controlling the process are calculated via average
        run length (ARL)
    -   ARL: desired average time between two false alarms when the
        process is \'in control\'
    -   this seems to be a difficult concept to set a limit for
-   spatial CUSUM modifies counts and control parameters by a weighted
    average of all counts
    -   weights are based on the distance between areas
-   Justification for the procedure is that p-values are preferred over
    test statistics
    -   why? surely there\'s a one-to-one correspondence?
    -   false discovery rate is used for error control
        -   this seems fine, but I\'m not sure I understand the
            procedure fully
        -   FDR = 1 - PPV, which makes that point a bit clearer
-   In the application, the authors use the first two years of data to
    estimate the in-control distribution
    -   this is because \'... there were no unusually high disease
        counts reported from any of the states during this period\'
    -   this is clearly problematic: is this the *eyeball* test
    -   the results will clearly depend on this choice, so a sensitivity
        analysis would be important
-   I found this somewhat difficult to read overall
    -   this could be due to my lack of knowledge in the area though!
