---
date: 2016-07-06
title: "Macro's for org-mode images"
description: "Daily notes"
tags: ["emacs", "org-mode"]
categories: notes
comments: true
---

Notes
-----

### Export dependent image extensions

I use emacs [org-mode](http://orgmode.org/) to prepare documents,
presentations etc. Orgmode+babel allows for literate programming, e.g.
by including R script within the document itself. Other examples of such
documents are .Rnw documents that combine latex and R (via knitr) or
.Rmd documents that combine markdown and R (again via knitr)[^1].

Sometimes, I\'ll write an `org` document that I want to convert into
both html and pdf formats. This is fine, until it comes to images. I
prefer svg images for including into html, and of course $\LaTeX$
requires (prefers) pdf images for inclusion. Creating the two formats is
easy; making extension choice depending on output format was a little
more tricky.

Enter macros.

Macros are simply text snippets that contain arguments. When referenced,
macros are expanded with their arguments in place. Further, macros can
contain `lisp`, so that you can do all sorts of cool trickery.

Now, to my example, for easy image insertion, dependent on output
format. It\'s simply a matter of defining an appropriate macro, that
when referenced will expand itself appropriately. You can see the code
and usage in the gist below. If exporting to html, the macro will expand
to `fig-name.svg`, if pdf, it will expand to `fig-name.pdf`.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/SteveLane/2149da48838e14db4a6871254f1c8c78.js"></script>

See the [org-mode
manual](http://orgmode.org/manual/Macro-replacement.html) for more
details on macros, as well as some pre-defined macros, e.g. for
inserting the author and date.

### Footnotes

[^1]: I used markdown (and Rmarkdown) for a little while, however I
    still don\'t think they\'re flexible enough for cross-referencing
    figures etc. Plus, org-mode has some extra goodies for note-taking,
    tagging and scheduling that I like.
