---
date: 2016-08-25
title: "Research notes"
description: "I just read this article and really enjoyed it"
tags: ["biosecurity", "invasives", "MCMC"]
categories: notes
comments: true
---

Readings
--------

### Pathway-level biosecurity

García-Díaz, P., Ross, J. V., Woolnough, A. P., & Cassey, P. (2016).
*Managing the risk of wildlife disease introduction: pathway-level
biosecurity for preventing the introduction of alien ranaviruses*. The
Journal of Applied Ecology. <http://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.12749>

This paper provides a really interesting way of modelling the effect of
various biosecurity activities on the introduction of ranaviruses,
particularly into Australia. Figure 1 describes their whole modelling
approach really nicely; rather than a flowchart, the authors present a
sequence of nested circles, each representing various stages where
biosecurity activities are in place. The outer ring denotes the whole
pool of vectors (amphibians) for the virus, which breaks the inner rings
when the sneaky buggers get through. It is very clear.

The model the authors use provides a nice description of this process;
it\'s essentially a chain of arrivals. They have a negative binomial
model for the number of amphibians arriving in a state at time t, which
depends on human traffic arriving at that state. The rest of the models
specify the number of detections: at the border, and post-border
detcetions. Finally, they model the number of amphibians that are not
detected by either border or post-border biosecurity activities. These
are the blighters that may carry disease into established/native
populations.

Notes
-----

### state-space models

-   I\'ve spent some time stuffing around trying to shoehorn some
    state-space models into [Rstan](http://mc-stan.org/interfaces/rstan)
    for sampling, but stan doesn\'t sample discrete parameters
-   Looks like the best way is to move to jags
    -   I think I\'ll look at [rjags](http://mcmc-jags.sourceforge.net/)
        (naturally)
