---
date: 2017-04-19
title: "sed, knitr, and clobbering rstan output"
comments: true
tags: ["r", "reproducible research", "cmdline", "latex"]
slug: "sed-knitr"
---

There's an unfortunate bug in `rstan` [https://github.com/stan-dev/rstan/issues/49](https://github.com/stan-dev/rstan/issues/49), whereby messages from the sampler escape through, and stick in the output. This occurs when using `knitr` to compile an Rnw document. The following is an example of such output:

```r

## 
##  Elapsed Time: 0.17787 seconds (Warm-up)
##                0.157655 seconds (Sampling)
##                0.335525 seconds (Total)
## 
## 
##  Elapsed Time: 0.17379 seconds (Warm-up)
##                0.157356 seconds (Sampling)
##                0.331146 seconds (Total)
## 
## 
##  Elapsed Time: 0.16872 seconds (Warm-up)
##                0.174496 seconds (Sampling)
##                0.343216 seconds (Total)
## 
## 
##  Elapsed Time: 0.219746 seconds (Warm-up)
##                0.165053 seconds (Sampling)
##                0.384799 seconds (Total)
```

I'd prefer not to have all this output floating around in my typeset documents, thank you very much! So, until the developers of `stan`/`rstan` fix the output issue, it's going to have to be brute force, I'm afraid! Although in this case, brute force is very quick!

So, we need to edit the tex file that `knitr` produces. We could obviously do that by hand, although it's tedious, not to mention not very reproducible.

(Note: everything below I'm doing on a mac. It is only tested on a mac, so ymmv.)

In my analysis pipeline, I use `Makefile`s to do all my heavy lifting. So, we need a simple way to take the tex output, and remove the offending `rstan` output.

Enter the mighty `sed`. `sed` is the stream editor, and mac uses [BSD `sed`](https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=sed&sektion=&n=1). With `sed`, we can search through a file using regular expressions, and replace them with appropriate replacements.

`knitr` places the output inside a **kframe** environment, so it's this stuff we want to remove. What I'm about to show you will remove **ALL** kframe environments however, so if you do have verbatim output you want to keep, you'll have to edit this. Also, I'm assuming that you have the `rstan` sampling statements in your Rnw file.

Let's say you have the following rule in your `Makefile` to generate the tex file (where the rule changes directory to `report` and runs `knitr::knit()` on the file output.tex):

```make
report/output.tex: report/output.Rnw
	cd $(<D); \
	echo "knitr::knit('$(<F)')" | R --no-save --no-restore
```

Leaving it at this, you'll get the aforementioned output creeping in to the tex file. Let's change it to this:

```make
report/output.tex: report/output.Rnw
	cd $(<D); \
	echo "knitr::knit('$(<F)')" | R --no-save --no-restore
	sed -i .bk -E $$'s/\\end{kframe}/&\\\n/g;' $(@F); \
	sed -i .bk '/\\begin{kframe}/,/\\end{kframe}/d;' $(@F); \
	rm *.bk
```

The `-i .bk` tells `sed` to store backups (required on BSD `sed`) with the extension .bk; the '$$' tells make not to interpret the string; and the stuff in the single quotes is the magic: `'s/searchstring/replacestring/g;'`. Here we're replacing the `\end{kframe}` with `\end{kframe}` and a newline. We need the newline, as `knitr` places the `\end{kframe}` on the same line as the following environment. We need the newline, because of the next `sed` command: `'/startsearchstring/,/endsearchstring/d'` replaces all text between (**and including**) the lines starting with 'startsearchstring' and ending with 'endsearchstring'. Finally we delete the backup.

And that's it!

```bash
$ make report/output.tex
```
	
And you're good to go!
